# Why people dance in the streets

**8 of November 2020**

Today is the 8 of November. I've been looking at news and social media today and yesterday, to all of these amazing images of people celebrating, dancing and singing in the streets of US cities. I don't find it surprising that people are excited after Joe Biden won an election (or after Donald Trump lost it), but I found the way of celebrating unexpected, mostly because I haven't seen this kind of energy regarding the results of an election in the US or other western countries. The first thing that this evoked into me was more the kind of celebrations I've seen when a national football team wins an important World Cup match, but definitely not the result of elections. I've seen that energy in protest, and even perhaps in campaigns, but not when calling a winner for a presidential race. Or perhaps it's just the media covering it differently, but I don't remember seeing news of this when Trump won in 2016, or Obama did in 2008 and 2012. So, what changed? I wondered

Then I started to read some comments comparing these celebrations comparing the celebrations to the ones on countries that have freed themselves from oppressive regimes and I remembered.

I was born in Argentina in late 1980. By that time my birth country was ruled by a non-democratic military junta that took power in 1976 allegedly to control some incidents of domestic terrorism, but instead use their time to commit atrocious human right violations and suppress political dissent through their power, murdering and raping anybody who spoke for their political left and worker unions, and doing the same to their friends and families by thousands, and kidnapping their children. After ruining the country economy and losing a war with the UK that they threw themselves into, the dictatorship started losing control, and massive strikes and protests forced them to call for an election that happened in 1983. 

By the time this happened, I wasn't even 3 years old; I was barely 3 when this new president elected democratically took office. So I was too young to understand what this was all about or what it meant. I am lucky and privileged to have been born into a family that was politically away from this conflict, so unlike many of the friends I've made later, no one in my close family was kidnapped in the street and disappeared forever without a trial or trace or body. So I learned most of this, as people in newer generations do, in history classes at school, and books, and stories from acquaintances or public interviews to people that actually lived through the era to remember or were directly affected. And of course by living later on through the consequences of all this, as I grew old enough to understand, including some of the trials to these criminals against humanity, or the people that up to today appear publicly discovering that they were actually kidnapped by force from their families 40 years ago. But I was too young to understand this as a toddler and too young to remember, so I have no direct memories of that dictatorship happening.

And still, there are two things that I remember. The first one is a memory of being outside, in the evening, with my two parents, being held by my dad. We were on a street in my home city, and there was a crowd going through a street across. They were chanting a name once and again: the name of the candidate that would, later on, be president. Likely, I didn't know what even that word was, but I remember the power and the energy of that crowd, and that has stayed with me for 37 years as one of my earliest memories. Talking with my parents that's likely a campaign visit from the candidate to my city. I almost have no personal memories from when I was less than 3, and still, there's a second one related to that election: On Sunday the 30th of October of 1983, my whole family was in our car (a van, we are a large family) coming back from a weekend away, it was the afternoon, and it was a really hot day. Rather than going straight home, my parents stopped at a school, where the polling booths were set up for election day, so one of them could vote (I don't remember which one was in that case, I just know from history that men and women voted in separate locations by that time, so we must have gone to another voting location after that, which I don't remember). I also remember waiting outside with one of my parents with other people doing the same, and some people having ice cream in that hot day while waiting being sold from a nearby truck that had seized a great business opportunity. I don't remember what happened after, but my family told me that I threw a tantrum because "I wanted to vote" too, and it took them a while until they figured out that in my young mind, the ice cream was obviously an integral part of the process.

I've been to several elections later, in more recent times and being old enough to understand some politics. I generally remember who I voted each time, but not the circumstances of the days, not even for my first time voting, not even some elections where opposing candidates have been intensely divided and bitter towards each other. And I know why: it's because how people felt around, and because even not being able to understand why this was so important, the most basic human ability to interpret emotions around me as a toddler was enough to absorb how intense this was, how people was being relieved from a moment of fear and of despair. 

The US hasn't had a dictatorship. Trump was their president, and legally voted by the Americans in 2016 (even if you argue about the fairness of their current election laws). But I can still understand the emotion of people crowding the streets all over the country, singing and dancing, and how intense it may be, I'm happy for you. 

That's the end of my story and my journey through processing what I see that has happened. I still have a couple of paragraphs left about the future

I'm personally joyful that the Trump presidency is coming to an end (and hoping it ends orderly, not all regimes end straight away after losing an election). Biden is definitely an improvement. I've also seen some idolizing, and come back to that history on the 1983 election. The guy that was chosen there and then had some success and some failures. He had to deal with the aftermath of the previous regime, and even quell an uprising from a faction from the military that attempted a coup. He took some controversial decisions regarding how to deal with the people involved in the atrocities before (issuing a quite general pardon to most). These kinds of scenarios may not be in your minds now, but be prepared because those are in the realm of possibility. My other thought for the future is that Biden doesn't seem to have a foreign policy much unlike previous presidents, including meddling in countries with weaker institutions to push towards governments more favourable to the US. The people that ruled Argentina from 1976 to 1983 did so with the well-documented support from the US government, and that's certainly not the only case. The US government has supported many regimes that reached an end and people danced and celebrated on the streets when they were gone, in the same way people were dancing in New York and Philadelphia yesterday. I'm hoping this period that the US went through brings more empathy towards the effects of US intervention elsewhere, which must happen from its citizens before their government.
